Hey there everyone,
and welcome to the video.
In this video we are going
to learn how we can create
a virtual environment in Python.
And just want to heads up on that
that there are many ways of
creating virtual environment and
there are variety of tools
available to create virtual
environments and we're going to
see all of them, but we have to
start somewhere.
So we're going to start
with the most commonly used.
As of now I am moving
on to the new tool.
Actually, I'll be honest with
you, I now prefer to use UV
and as a virtual environment tool
I will definitely cover that
up eventually in the series.
But I would want you to
have an experience where
everybody is going right now.
So majority of people haven't
moved on to the uv that's
latest and cutting edge.
Majority of the people use
pip, VENV as a tool.
I will walk you through how we can
work with that and you will also
learn how you can install other
dependencies as well with this.
So, so first of all let's go on
to the screen and try to understand
that why anybody would want
to have a virtual environment.
So there is a simple
explanation for this.
Let's just say this is your
machine, a pretty big one.
This is your machine and I happen
to call everything as a machine.
You can feel free
to call it as computer.
This is my old habit
of calling computers as machine.
I love to call them
and I have a habit of this.
So in this machine, let's
just say you go ahead
and install a Python version.
So we go ahead and say, hey,
now I have installed Python
in my machine, this is my Python.
And along with the Python,
let's just say you are working
on something interesting which
includes database as well.
So we'll just go ahead and say we are
working on postgres as a database.
All right, no problem at all.
We can go ahead and install all of
them and keep on working with them.
But there is a problem.
There is a new project and which
uses a different version of Python.
So let's just say we are going
to tilt this a little so that we
can just reference this as
a different version of Python.
How you're going to work
on a different version of Python.
All right, for this version
to work on, you have to uninstall
this version and go ahead
and install this version.
That's little bit difficult.
Now apart from this, that's just one
tip of the iceberg of the problem.
Let's just say you want to again
go back onto the latest version.
So you will uninstall this and you
will install the latest version.
This is the problem, this.
But there could be other tools
as well that you want to use.
For example, let's just say this
is another utility that you have
installed to work on the Python.
This could be a utility
to talk to CSV files or PDF
files or anything else.
If you go ahead and want to use
it, you can install that using
Pip, which is a utility that comes
up by default with the Python.
So you can go ahead and say,
hey, I want to install this
utility on my machine.
That's great, you can go
ahead and install this.
Similarly, there are utilities
like Flask, there are utilities
like Numpy for Data Science.
Now, all of them you're installing,
and if any one of them gets a change
in the version, you have
to actually uninstall this and have
to grab another version of it.
So this needs to go out and this new
version needs to come into this.
But maybe your other files were
dependent on this previous version.
I hope you are getting the sense
of why this is getting a nightmare
as we go further into this.
So what we do or what we try to
do is instead of doing installation
on the whole of my machine,
I really don't like to install
these days, even any database.
I use the docker for this
docker for another day.
But I don't prefer to install any
Python utilities on my whole system.
What I prefer to do is that,
hey, give me inside my computer a,
virtual environment.
This is a temporary environment
which you can activate
and deactivate based on when you are
using it or not using it.
And inside this environment, I prefer
to install all of my utilities,
so I can just go ahead and keep on
adding my utilities as I need them.
Now, this utility and whatever
I'm installing on my main machine
have no connection at all.
This is a sandboxed environment.
This environment is not going
to talk to your real environment
or real Python installed.
You, you have to get a copy
of Python into this.
Luckily for us, the tools that we are
going to use like pip, they actually
go ahead and install a version
of Python automatically for you.
And on top of that, you can go
ahead and install any
further utilities, like Numpies,
Flask, Pandas, whatever you
wish, any Python utility,
you can go ahead and install that.
If you want something to be
on your main machine, you can
still use Python and PIP and install
that on main machine,
but that will not be available
inside your virtual environment.
You have to go ahead and say, hey,
this is my Virtual Environment.
This is activated and I want
to just work within this.
Once I'm done working
I can go outside.
Now apart from this, there
are also a couple of ways that
you create a special file.
And the name of this file,
at least for the initial one, is
called as requirement Txt.
This file has nothing, it
just has all the things
that you're installing.
So as soon as you install something
you go ahead and mark this, that
hey, I want to move this
information that I have installed
this file in my requirement txt so
that if anybody else wants to work
on it they can actually consult
the requirement Txt and can
install my file.
I hope you are getting it.
It's not that hard.
It's just a text file
in which the information for all
of this file is available.
All.
Right, good enough.
So one of the most common way
of installing these virtual
environment or creating this
sandbox is known as Venv.
Virtual Environment.
Yeah, that's the name.
But this is not the only one.
There are a couple of others
available as well and out
of that one of my favorite one is uv
and we're going to cover
the installation of UV as well.
And we'll cover both
Virtual Environment and uv.
There are others as well, like
there is one known as Poetry.
We will not cover that
but again there could be like
five others as well.
I don't know much about them.
The most common one which are
used in the industry are
Virtual Environment and uv.
These are the ones that
we are going to cover.
Now let's go ahead and see
a practical example of how
this actually can be done.
This is not really
that hard of a program to work
on with super easy.
Just go ahead and create a new folder
and we're going to create a virtual
environment within this folder.
So I'll go ahead and create
a new folder and I'm going
to call this one as Test Venv.
I'll actually remove this
folder after creating this video
because there's no point
of providing this folder.
It's just a configuration file.
You can always regenerate that.
Now inside this folder I would
like to right click and we'll click
on Open Integrated Terminal.
Now this is our Python
environment and terminal.
Let's go ahead and see that I do
have a Python and if I go ahead
and say V, I don't remember it's a
dash V or dash dash version I have
to always look for what's the
version?
Come on.
Oh My bad, it's actually
Python 3 in my case.
So Python 3 and I guess
then I can say V.
Again it's little difficult
to find it out.
I usually don't check
the versions like this.
But anyways, so we'll just kill
this and I will walk you through
that how we can actually
generate a virtual environment.
So now notice here I am inside this.
So if I check the pwd present working
directory, I'm in the test vnv.
That's the most important part.
Once I'm here I have to use
Python 3 in my case and in your
case it's just Python because
you are on Windows and then I
have to provide an option of
dash that I want to use a module
with Python.
The module name is venv and I want
to create a virtual environment.
Now virtual environment
will like to keep some of the files
and Python installations somewhere
in your directory.
So that can be kept in any directory.
Some people like to call it as dot
venv Some people like
to call it as directly venv.
Whatever you do, there is no
right or wrong in this one.
As soon as I hit enter you will
notice that this will take a
second, but if I open this up
folder now I do have this venv
and I have bin include lib all
of this.
This whole thing actually is
saying that hey, you have
a Python 3.1.3.2 version, we can
change the versions as well.
Apart from this we have this bin
and inside the bin you
can see that we have this
activate script as well.
We have the pip and a whole
bunch of other things.
Now the next thing that
you have to do is go inside
this venv and activate
your virtual environment.
Right now it's not activated.
So first I'll walk you through how
you can do that in Windows and then
I will walk you through that how
we can do that on Mac and Linux.
So Windows user, your file
environment is venv v Env.
Go inside that, then you can just
press the forward slash, that's
a Windows thing and you will have
something known as script and this
always remains exactly same.
So inside the scripts you
will further can have
a forward slash and activate.
As long as you just
press this, that is it.
You will activate your
virtual environment.
If any point you want to deactivate
it, just write deactivate, hit Enter
and that's it for if you're on Linux
or a Mac, then you have to write
source in front of it and then we
will go again, exactly in the same
directory.
For in our case it's venv.
Venv.
And then we know that
it's inside the bin.
So let's go inside Bin and then
again the same file activate as
soon as I hit enter for this.
Oops, my bad.
The file name is actually venv.
I missed a V.
And there we go.
Notice here it says Venv
at the very start of it.
This means the virtual
environment is active.
Now I can go ahead and run
all these commands which we
are going to see in a second.
And now let's go ahead and see that.
Can I go ahead and deactivate it?
Yes, the command is same,
deactivate and hit enter.
That's it.
Your virtual environment is gone.
So what just happened?
You just asked your terminal that,
hey, I want to be inside this box or
I want to be in the whole machine.
So this whole machine is your
basic Python where you have
installed, but we have a one copy
of Python installed in our
virtual environment as well.
So we are into this Venv.
Let's go ahead and try this again.
Source Venv Bin Activate.
So if you're calling it as
vnv, go inside that folder.
If you're calling it as
Windows, exactly same,
just the path is forward slashed.
All right, now sometimes what will
happen that your VS code might not
be able to detect the whole thing
that hey, we haven't seen that.
Where is your virtual environment?
In that case you can just go ahead
and say pwd as a present working
directory, copy this whole thing
along with this whole thing.
Because this is where
your Activate file is.
And at least you have
to walk till the bin.
And then what you can do is
let me just go ahead
and run the command again.
Let's just say I have
copied this whole thing.
Copy that.
And then press on your VS
code command shift P.
If you're on the Mac or Control
Shift, push on Windows and this will
open up this whole terminal thing.
And then write Select Interpreter.
This is the first thing that will
come to you, the select interpreter.
Click on this and then you
can actually go ahead and create
a virtual environment
from here as well, which I
usually don't recommend.
And then you have to enter the path
you can select from the recommended
one which will select a few for you.
Like there's one in the user
Bin, there's one Anaconda
installation as well.
But if you click on Enter the path
now you can just enter the path.
So Whatever we have copied using pwd,
just place that and then we
know that inside this we have
venv and we have a slash bin.
This is where my activate script is.
So you can just give that path.
In my case it has already
activated, so I'm fine with that.
But this is also another way of
activating your virtual environment.
Sometimes when we do that, you will
notice that with the uv, it
sometimes is not able to recognize
this virtual environment because
the flow of UV is kind of fresh.
It's not that much known
by the interpreters and VS code.
So it happens.
All right, let's go back.
And this is the basic
of virtual environment.
Now the interesting part is what can
I do with this virtual environment?
You can do a lot of stuff.
First and most common stuff is
now first of all, I don't have
to say Python 3 now because we
are in this virtual environment
and it's exactly same for you
and me whether you are on
Windows, I'm, on Mac, doesn't
really matter for all of us it's
just Python now.
And another utility
that we have is pip.
So if you just write, hit PIP
and enter, you are going
to notice that we have the PIP
installed and this is how
we can run this command.
Let's go ahead and run
the PIP command.
So I will say that hey pip, I want
to install the PIP, which is already
installed, but I want to upgrade it.
So I can just go ahead and provide
a flag of dash dash so it will get
me a latest version of the pip.
And you will notice it says
you have installed Python
package global environment.
You may have that and conflicts.
Would you like to create
Virtual environment?
No, I am already on Virtual
environment, so please
ignore this message.
Now we have the latest version
of pip, being installed.
I can install dependencies with it.
I can go ahead and say pip, install
and whatever I want to install.
That is nice.
Let's just say there is a package
known as Request which
helps you to make web request.
I can go ahead and install this.
That is it.
It will go ahead,
take the dependencies, sub
dependencies, everything.
There is another
package known as Flask.
So I can go ahead and say I want to
install Flask or Django or Fast API.
There are so many of them, I can go
ahead and enter this and this will
install this package as well.
Now most important part is I'm
installing these packages
in the virtual environment,
not in the main environment.
So if I go outside of this and I say
that hey, I want to use request or
Flask, they are not available to me.
They're available within
this virtual environment.
And sometimes people don't ship
this venv they simply ship a file
which we just studied that
requirement txt that if you want
to know what all things are
installed in my virtual
environment, I will give you a
file and take consultancy with
this file and install all the
things which are mentioned there.
How do we generate this file?
PIP can actually generate
that file very easily.
The command that we want
to use is PIP Freeze.
If you enter the PIP freeze
command you will notice that
these are all the dependencies
which we have installed.
And you might be wondering,
hey, we didn't install this
much, we only installed Flask.
All right, that is there.
We also install request.
But what are the other things?
Now when you install Flask
or request, they are not
the alone that comes up.
Sometimes they are sub dependent
on other modules of Python.
They also need to be installed.
In this case that's exactly
what PIP has done for you.
It has gone ahead and installed
all these dependencies or
sub dependencies for you.
And in order to work all of this we
need to actually grab all of this.
Now here's a command.
Once we know that PIP freeze
command exists, we can redirect it
into any file.
And this is a Linux based utility.
What we are going here is
a Linux based utility which
comes in Python as well.
So again, if you are
in Windows it will work.
If you are in a Mac or
Linux it will work.
But remember this whole thing,
a lot of people think that this
is a Python specific thing.
It is not.
It is a Linux.
We are just redirecting the output
of this command in a file.
That is all we are doing.
I still wonder that so many
people who are so much experienced
in Python don't know this
requirements txt and this doesn't
need to be requirement txt.
You can call it as dependencies
txt or install txt.
Whatever you wish to call, you
can just go ahead and call this.
This is just a kind of a philosophy
that people use that hey, let's
call this as requirement txt.
If I hit it enter what
you will notice.
Now inside this file we have this
requirement txt and all
of the files are available to me.
If I install anything I have to go
ahead and repeat this process again.
Super simple, super easy.
Now I can go ahead and install
from this and you can
just go ahead and say hey, I
want to install all this.
Or you can install them one by one
along with the version
and everything we will see this,
some of the stuff as well.
But this is all.
Now I can go back and say that,
hey, I want to deactivate it.
So go ahead and say deactivate
and that is all.
Now you are outside of this.
Notice the venv also is gone.
But again, that's not
a true check of this.
Always check that.
Hey, whether the Python version
that we are installing is different
or not, or just kill this.
And by the way, one more interesting
thing I want to walk you through.
If I go ahead and activate this
command again, source activate.
And if you're thinking that,
hey, I'll just go ahead
and kill this terminal and I will
start another terminal.
Notice here, this terminal which
you're going for, this doesn't have
this virtual environment because
you're opening the folder terminal
in the root of this.
But we have the virtual
environment in the test vnv.
Now let's go ahead and open
an integrated terminal here and you
will notice your terminal is gone.
Sometimes it goes away,
sometimes it doesn't go away.
So make sure you're aware
of whether the virtual
environment is activate or not.
Always pay attention to this.
And I can run this.
And there we go.
Our virtual environment is activated.
Now I can go ahead and install
whatever I wish to do.
Let's go ahead and say deactivate.
And it's gone now.
Now sometimes, again, remember,
sometimes it goes away by
killing the terminal,
sometimes it doesn't go away.
And that's it.
Told you.
That is the reason why I said I won't
be giving you this file because
there is nothing inside this file.
It is absolutely the basic.
I'll, go ahead and delete
this because we don't
need it technically.
I hope you got the idea
of why the virtual environments
are important and what
they do and how it works.
Now UV also does exactly same.
We have this sandbox environment.
We can install the utilities, but uv,
instead of using the requirement
txt, it uses a different file name.
Rest of the process is exactly same.
All right, hope you have enjoyed
this video and this was very
beneficial for you to understand
the virtual environments.
That is it for this video.
Let's go ahead and catch
up in the next one.